Command pattern (#247)
rust-unofficial/patterns: patterns/behavioural/command.md

# Command

## Description

The basic idea of the Command pattern is to separate out actions into its own
objects and pass them as parameters.

## Motivation

Suppose we have a sequence of actions or transactions encapsulated as objects.
We want these actions or commands to be executed or invoked in some order later
at different time. These commands may also be triggered as a result of some event.
For example, when a user pushes a button, or on arrival of a data packet.

> In addition, these commands might be be undoable. This may come in useful for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, these commands might be undoable. This may come in useful for
```
is this a typo?

operations of an editor. We might want to store logs of executed commands so that
we could reapply the changes later if the system crashes.

## Example

Define two database operations `create table` and `add field`. Each of these
operations is a command which knows how to undo the command, e.g., `drop table`
and `remove field`. When a user invokes a database migration operation then each
command is executed in the defined order, and when the user invokes the rollback
operation then the whole set of commands is invoked in reverse order.

## Approach: Using trait objects

We define a common trait which encapsulates our command with two operations

> `execute` and `rollback`. All command `structs` must implement this trait.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`execute` and `rollback`. All command `struct`s must implement this trait.
```

```rust
pub trait Migration {
    fn execute(&self) -> &str;
    fn rollback(&self) -> &str;
}

pub struct CreateTable;
impl Migration for CreateTable {
    fn execute(&self) -> &str {
        "create table"
    }
    fn rollback(&self) -> &str {
        "drop table"
    }
}

pub struct AddField;
impl Migration for AddField {
    fn execute(&self) -> &str {
        "add field"
    }
    fn rollback(&self) -> &str {
        "remove field"
    }
}

struct Schema {
    commands: Vec<Box<dyn Migration>>,
}

impl Schema {
    fn new() -> Self {
        Self { commands: vec![] }
    }

    fn add_migration(&mut self, cmd: Box<dyn Migration>) {
        self.commands.push(cmd);
    }

    fn execute(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.commands.iter().map(|cmd| cmd.execute()).collect()
    }
    fn rollback(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.commands
            .iter()

>             .rev()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            .rev() // reverse iterator's direction
```

            .map(|cmd| cmd.rollback())
            .collect()
    }
}

fn main() {
    let mut schema = Schema::new();

    let cmd = Box::new(CreateTable);
    schema.add_migration(cmd);
    let cmd = Box::new(AddField);
    schema.add_migration(cmd);

    assert_eq!(vec!["create table", "add field"], schema.execute());
    assert_eq!(vec!["remove field", "drop table"], schema.rollback());
}
```

## Approach: Using function pointers

> We could follow another solution by creating each individual command as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We could follow another approach by creating each individual command as
```

a different function and store function pointers to invoke these functions later
at a different time. Since function pointers implement all three traits `Fn`,
`FnMut`, and `FnOnce` we could as well pass and store closures instead of
function pointers.

```rust
type FnPtr<'a> = fn() -> &'a str;
struct Command<'a> {
    execute: FnPtr<'a>,
    rollback: FnPtr<'a>,
}

struct Schema<'a> {
    commands: Vec<Box<Command<'a>>>,
}

impl<'a> Schema<'a> {
    fn new() -> Self {
        Self { commands: vec![] }
    }
    fn add_migration(&mut self, execute: FnPtr<'a>, rollback: FnPtr<'a>) {
        self.commands.push(Box::new(Command { execute, rollback }));
    }
    fn execute(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.commands.iter().map(|cmd| (cmd.execute)()).collect()
    }
    fn rollback(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.commands
            .iter()
            .rev()
            .map(|cmd| (cmd.rollback)())
            .collect()
    }
}

> fn add_field() -> &'static str {

Reviewer: Same for next example

> fn add_field() -> &'static str {

Author: To be honest, I found `&'static str` more elegant than `String::from("foobar")` or `"foobar".to_owned` or smth like this.
In addition, if we return a `String` then don't we need to make changes in `main` like this 
```rust
assert_eq!(vec![String::from("create table"), String::from(""add field")], schema.execute());
```
Is it more readable?

> fn add_field() -> &'static str {

Author: Or does it coerce automatically from slice to String?

> fn add_field() -> &'static str {

Reviewer: I just wanted to make sure you considered the option 👍

# Command

## Description

Suppose we have a sequence of actions or transactions
encapsulated as objects.
We want these actions or commands to be
executed or invoked in some order later at different time.
These commands may also be triggered as a result

> of some event. For example when a user pushes a button

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of some event. For example, when a user pushes a button,
```

Unsure about the second one, maybe an English native can check for the Oxford comma thingy

or on arrival of a data packet.

> In addition, these commands might be be undoable.
> For example, operations of the editor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, these commands might be be undoable.
This may come in useful for operations of an editor.
```

> We also may want to store logs of executed commands

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We might want to store logs of executed commands
```

> so that we could reapply the changes later if system crashes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
so that we could reapply the changes later if the system crashes.
```

## Motivation

Define two database operations
`create table` and `add field`.
Each of these operations is a command
which knows how to undo the command, e.g.,
`drop table` and `remove field`.
When a user invokes a database migration
operation then each command is executed in the defined order,
and when the user invokes the rollback operation

> then each undo operation is invoked in reverse order.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't say for me "Why and where you should use the pattern" but more describes the actions that are done in our example?

Author: @simonsan It describes a concrete example. But I could add more general description of why and when we should use this pattern in a couple of sentences. In fact, I already mention in the Description part.

Reviewer 2: yeah, i would propose to do that so people used to this template can easily check in `Motivation` why and where to use this pattern. maybe also to shorten then the description and move the corresponding sentences to motivation bringing the text that is now in motivation to an `# Example` headline as a description of the following approaches

Author: @simonsan Made some changes.

> ## First approach. Using trait objects

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Approach: Using trait objects
```

Reviewer: Maybe "Trait objects approach"?

}

pub struct CreateTable;
impl Migration for CreateTable {
    fn execute(&self) -> &str {
        "create table"
    }
    fn rollback(&self) -> &str {
        "drop table"
    }
}

pub struct AddField;
impl Migration for AddField {
    fn execute(&self) -> &str {
        "add field"
    }
    fn rollback(&self) -> &str {
        "remove field"
    }
}

struct Schema {
    commands: Vec<Box<dyn Migration>>,
}

impl Schema {
    fn new() -> Self {
        Self { commands: vec![] }
    }

    fn add_migration(&mut self, cmd: Box<dyn Migration>) {
        self.commands.push(cmd);
    }

    fn execute(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.commands.iter().map(|cmd| cmd.execute()).collect()
    }
    fn rollback(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.commands
            .iter()
            .rev()
            .map(|cmd| cmd.rollback())
            .collect()
    }
}

fn main() {
    let mut schema = Schema::new();

    let cmd = Box::new(CreateTable);
    schema.add_migration(cmd);
    let cmd = Box::new(AddField);
    schema.add_migration(cmd);

    assert_eq!(vec!["create table", "add field"], schema.execute());
    assert_eq!(vec!["remove field", "drop table"], schema.rollback());
}
```

> ## Second approach. Using function pointers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Approach: Using function pointers
```

Reviewer: Maybe "Function pointers approach"?

We could follow another solution by
creating each individual command as
a different function and store function pointers

> to invoke these function later at different time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to invoke these functions later at a different time.
```

closures instead of function pointers.

```rust
type FnPtr<'a> = fn() -> &'a str;
struct Command<'a> {
    execute: FnPtr<'a>,
    rollback: FnPtr<'a>,
}

struct Schema<'a> {
    commands: Vec<Box<Command<'a>>>,
}

impl<'a> Schema<'a> {
    fn new() -> Self {
        Self { commands: vec![] }
    }
    fn add_migration(&mut self, execute: FnPtr<'a>, rollback: FnPtr<'a>) {
        self.commands.push(Box::new(Command { execute, rollback }));
    }
    fn execute(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.commands.iter().map(|cmd| (cmd.execute)()).collect()
    }
    fn rollback(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.commands
            .iter()
            .rev()
            .map(|cmd| (cmd.rollback)())
            .collect()
    }
}

fn add_field() -> &'static str {
    "add field"
}

fn remove_field() -> &'static str {
    "remove field"
}

fn main() {
    let mut schema = Schema::new();
    schema.add_migration(|| "create table", || "drop table");
    schema.add_migration(add_field, remove_field);
    assert_eq!(vec!["create table", "add field"], schema.execute());
    assert_eq!(vec!["remove field", "drop table"], schema.rollback());
}
```

> ## Third approach. Using `Fn` trait objects

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Approach: Using `Fn` trait objects
```

Finally, instead of defining a common command
trait we simply store each command implementing

> `Fn` trait separately in vectors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `Fn` trait separately in vectors.
```

        E: Fn() -> &'a str + 'static,
        R: Fn() -> &'a str + 'static,
    {
        self.executes.push(Box::new(execute));
        self.rollbacks.push(Box::new(rollback));
    }
    fn execute(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.executes.iter().map(|cmd| cmd()).collect()
    }
    fn rollback(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.rollbacks.iter().rev().map(|cmd| cmd()).collect()
    }
}

fn add_field() -> &'static str {
    "add field"
}

fn remove_field() -> &'static str {
    "remove field"
}

fn main() {
    let mut schema = Schema::new();
    schema.add_migration(|| "create table", || "drop table");
    schema.add_migration(add_field, remove_field);
    assert_eq!(vec!["create table", "add field"], schema.execute());
    assert_eq!(vec!["remove field", "drop table"], schema.rollback());
}
```

## Discussion

If our commands are small and may be defined
as functions or passed as a closure then the
second approach might be preferable since it
does not exploit dynamic dispatch.
But if our command is a whole struct with a bunch
of functions and variables defined as seperate module
then the first approach would be more suitable.
As an example, the first approach is used in

> the [`actix`](https://actix.rs/) when we register handler function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[`actix`](https://actix.rs/) when it registers a handler function
```

for routes.

## See also

- [Command pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command_pattern)

> - [A powerful, pragmatic, and extremely fast web framework for Rust](https://actix.rs/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Already linked above.

# Command

## Description

> The basic idea of the Command pattern is separate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The basic idea of the Command pattern is to separate
```

out actions into its own objects and pass them
as parameters.

## Motivation

Suppose we have a sequence of actions or transactions
encapsulated as objects.
We want these actions or commands to be
executed or invoked in some order later at different time.
These commands may also be triggered as a result
of some event. For example, when a user pushes a button,
or on arrival of a data packet.
In addition, these commands might be be undoable.
This may come in useful for operations of an editor.
We might want to store logs of executed commands
so that we could reapply the changes later if the system crashes.

## Example

Define two database operations
`create table` and `add field`.
Each of these operations is a command
which knows how to undo the command, e.g.,
`drop table` and `remove field`.
When a user invokes a database migration
operation then each command is executed in the defined order,
and when the user invokes the rollback operation

> then each undo operation is invoked in reverse order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
then the whole set of commands is invoked in reverse order.
```

Reviewer 2: Seemed a bit confusing to me before

```rust
type FnPtr<'a> = fn() -> &'a str;
struct Command<'a> {
    execute: FnPtr<'a>,
    rollback: FnPtr<'a>,
}

struct Schema<'a> {
    commands: Vec<Box<Command<'a>>>,
}

impl<'a> Schema<'a> {
    fn new() -> Self {
        Self { commands: vec![] }
    }
    fn add_migration(&mut self, execute: FnPtr<'a>, rollback: FnPtr<'a>) {
        self.commands.push(Box::new(Command { execute, rollback }));
    }
    fn execute(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.commands.iter().map(|cmd| (cmd.execute)()).collect()
    }
    fn rollback(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.commands
            .iter()
            .rev()
            .map(|cmd| (cmd.rollback)())
            .collect()
    }
}

fn add_field() -> &'static str {
    "add field"
}

fn remove_field() -> &'static str {
    "remove field"
}

fn main() {
    let mut schema = Schema::new();
    schema.add_migration(|| "create table", || "drop table");
    schema.add_migration(add_field, remove_field);
    assert_eq!(vec!["create table", "add field"], schema.execute());
    assert_eq!(vec!["remove field", "drop table"], schema.rollback());
}
```

## Approach: Using `Fn` trait objects

Finally, instead of defining a common command

> trait we simply store each command implementing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
trait we could store each command implementing
```

```rust
type Migration<'a> = Box<dyn Fn() -> &'a str>;

struct Schema<'a> {
    executes: Vec<Migration<'a>>,
    rollbacks: Vec<Migration<'a>>,
}

impl<'a> Schema<'a> {
    fn new() -> Self {
        Self {
            executes: vec![],
            rollbacks: vec![],
        }
    }
    fn add_migration<E, R>(&mut self, execute: E, rollback: R)
    where
        E: Fn() -> &'a str + 'static,
        R: Fn() -> &'a str + 'static,
    {
        self.executes.push(Box::new(execute));
        self.rollbacks.push(Box::new(rollback));
    }
    fn execute(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.executes.iter().map(|cmd| cmd()).collect()
    }
    fn rollback(&self) -> Vec<&str> {
        self.rollbacks.iter().rev().map(|cmd| cmd()).collect()
    }
}

fn add_field() -> &'static str {
    "add field"
}

fn remove_field() -> &'static str {
    "remove field"
}

fn main() {
    let mut schema = Schema::new();
    schema.add_migration(|| "create table", || "drop table");
    schema.add_migration(add_field, remove_field);
    assert_eq!(vec!["create table", "add field"], schema.execute());
    assert_eq!(vec!["remove field", "drop table"], schema.rollback());
}
```

> ## Discussion

Reviewer 2: A discussion when to use the third approach (`Using `Fn` trait objects`) would be nice as well.

If our commands are small and may be defined

> as functions or passed as a closure then the
> second approach might be preferable since it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as functions or passed as a closure then using
function pointers might be preferable since it
```

does not exploit dynamic dispatch.
But if our command is a whole struct with a bunch
of functions and variables defined as seperate module

> then the first approach would be more suitable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
then using trait objects would be more suitable.
```

> As an example, the first approach is used in
> [`actix`](https://actix.rs/) when it registers a handler function
> for routes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A case of application can be found in [`actix`](https://actix.rs/),
which uses trait objects when it registers a handler function
for routes.
```

## See also

> - [Command pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command_pattern)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Command pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Command_pattern)

- [Another example for the `command` pattern](https://web.archive.org/web/20210223131236/https://chercher.tech/rust/command-design-pattern-rust)
```
